What is virtualization?
Virtualization is a technology that allows you to create multiple virtual versions of
computer resources — such as servers, storage, or operating systems — on a single physical
machine. It works by using special software called a **hypervisor**, 
which divides the hardware into separate virtual environments, each acting like a real 
computer. This helps make better use of hardware, reduces costs, and allows easy testing
backup, and management of different systems on the same device.


hypervisor=> it us software that creates and runs virtule machine (VMs) like oracle VirtualBook
1.Virtual box share hardware resources from Host OS
2.Separate set of virtual CPU, RAM, storage etc
3.VMS are fully isolated (independent of hosted OS) 

Benefits of VMS
• We don't need new resources to use different OS
• No risk of any issues with your primary OS
• Testing any app on different OS

Types of hypervisor
Type1(Bare Metal)=>Used by Cloud Providers and Enterprise Servers.
Type2(hosted)=> in owr own machine like laptop 

Virtualization Use Case
• Cheap
• Reduces
    workload
    Space
    Energy
• Easy backup using snapshot
• Easy recovery


Cloud Computing
=>on-demand delivery of IT resources over the Internet with pay-as-you-go pricing..
Accees computing resources (like servers, storage, databases, and software) over the internet, 
rather than owning and maintaining physical hardware. 
example
• Amazon Web Services (AWS)
• Microsoft Azure
• Google Cloud Platform (GCP)

Types of Cloud Computing
1.Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS)
=> IaaS contains the basic building blocks for cloud IT. It typically provides
access to networking features, computers (virtual or on dedicated
hardware), and data storage space. IaaS gives you the highest level of
flexibility and management control over your IT resources. It is most
similar to the existing IT resources with which many IT departments and
developers are familiar.  

simple terms=>You get the empty shop — you bring your own ice cream machines, ingredients, and staff.
➡️ Example: AWS EC2, Google Cloud Compute.

2.Platform as a Service (PaaS)
=> PaaS removes the need for you to manage underlying infrastructure
(usually hardware and operating systems), and allows you to focus on
the deployment and management of your applications. This helps you
be more efficient as you don't need to worry about resource
procurement, capacity planning, software maintenance, patching, or any
of the other undifferentiated heavy lifting involved in running your
application.

The shop already has machines and tools — you just make and sell your ice cream.
➡️ Example: Google App Engine, Heroku.

3.Software as a Service (SaaS)
=> SaaS provides you with a complete product that is run and managed by
the service provider. In most cases, people referring to SaaS are referring
to end-user applications (such as web-based email). With a SaaS
offering, you don't have to think about how the service is maintained or
how the underlying infrastructure is managed. You only need to think
about how you will use that particular software.

You don’t make anything — you just buy and enjoy the ice cream that’s already prepared.
➡️ Example: Gmail, Google Docs.



🧱 IaaS = You build everything.
⚙️ PaaS = You build on provided tools.
🍨 SaaS = You just use what’s already made.




Different Types of Cloud Deployments:
• Public Cloud: A shared cloud environment where multiple
users can access services over the internet, like AWS or Azure.

• Private Cloud: A dedicated cloud environment for one
organization, offering more control and privacy.
 
•Hybrid Cloud: A mix of public and private clouds, allowing
data and applications to move between them for flexibility.

FEW FEATURES COMMONLY OFFERED BY CLOUD PROVIDERS:
COMPUTE SERVICES
STORAGE SERVICES
DATABASE SERVICES
NETWORKING SERVICES
CONTAINER SERVICES
SERVERLESS COMPUTING
MACHINE LEARNING SERVICES
IDENTITY AND ACCESS MANAGEMENT (IAM)